A Quest for Nuclear Power 
Abuse of nuclear power has been a concern both since its discovery and particularly after the world witnessed the destruction it could cause in Hiroshima and Nagasaki.  While nuclear energy also has relatively positive applications, in 1957 the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) was established to ensure that states were using nuclear energy for the sole purpose of peaceful operations, rather than diverting RANDOM CHANGE 2342 nuclear power for military means.   Each country germane to this case study either is or has been a member of the IAEA.  Israel and the United States joined in 1957, Iran in 1958, Syria in 1963, and North Korea in 1974, though North Korea then withdrew their membership in 1994. 
Despite the institution of the IAEA, Israel feared the presence of nuclear activity in other Middle Eastern states.  In 1981, the Israelis executed Operation Opera, which involved an air strike that destroyed the Osirak nuclear reactor in Iraq, furnished for the Iraqis by the French.  Both Iraq and France asserted the reactor’s peaceful function, a contention doubted by Israel.   This action was condemned by the IAEA and the United Nations in their Security Council resolution 487.   Regardless, to justify this and other potential attacks, then Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin enacted the Begin doctrine, which stated Israel’s determination to prevent any adversary from developing or attaining nuclear weapons, judging such an occurrence an existential threat.  
Syria was somewhat late in conveying its intent to develop nuclear power, establishing the Atomic Energy Commission of Syria as late as 1976.  Their attempts to attain the equipment for such a pursuit proved rather ineffective.   In 1983 Syria tried to acquire a French reactor, but the French firm ultimately withdrew from the agreement when it became clear that Syria lacked the necessary financial resources.   In 1985 Syria approached the USSR, but negotiations fell through again due to financial conflicts.   Both of Syria’s nuclear deals with Argentina in 1990 and India in 1991 were suspended by either or both U.S. and Israeli pressure.   Further, RANDOM CHANGE 2342 in the early 1990s, document were found suggesting that Abdul Qadeer Khan, considered the Pakistani "father of the atom bomb," offered to illegally sell to Hafez al-Assad, the senior Assad, nuclear material and equipment, to which he was rejected. 
Syria finally accomplished limited success in 1991 with the SRR-1 (Syrian research reactor), supplied by China and fully operational by 1998.  This arrangement introduced proliferation worries from the U.S. and Israel, but the reactor is monitored by the IAEA.  Moreover, as the smallest research reactor on the world market, the SRR-1 is, according to IAEA, unable to produce enough fissile material to produce nuclear weapons.  Further, this nuclear facility is limited to two operational hours per day.  However, it would seem that Syria’s nuclear ambitions exceeded this single, legally limited reactor.
